Hello, dear listeners. My name is Tatyana Zhubreva.
I am a lecturer, a candidate for the Technical Sciences of the Russian Economic Academy of Plekhanov.
Today, you will be offered a video course on the adoption of rational and creative decisions in business.
During the video lecture, we will discuss the following aspects and points.
First of all, we will discuss the adoption of rational decisions based on scientific research,
which we discussed in the previous course.
We will look at the features of decision-making in the conditions of uncertainty.
We will look at some techniques for adopting rational and creative decisions.
We will also focus on common mistakes, typical mistakes,
that are made by leaders and ordinary people when making rational decisions.
It should be noted that this video course is a logical continuation of the courses
on management research, qualitative research, management research, quantitative research,
as well as development courses and decision-making.
And they will certainly be more useful to managers who already have experience in making decisions in their professional activities.
And in their professional activities, managers are always associated with the process of development, adoption and implementation of management decisions.
The decisions that the manager makes should be justified and balanced.
Moreover, they should be fulfilled.
Unfortunately, in management situations, decisions are often made in the conditions of uncertainty.
That is, the decision has a probability nature.
And the unpredictability of the results will be higher than the level of professionalism of the manager
and lower knowledge in the field of technology, development and adoption of management decisions.
In management, the decision connects almost all aspects of the manager's activities,
starting with the purpose of the position, description and objective assessment of the situation,
forecasting of the result and, in fact, determines the effectiveness of the functioning of all systems and business processes.
The goals and tasks set within this video course flow from above.
First of all, this task is to show the role and importance of conducting research in the preparation of management research,
as I have already said, to familiarize with some techniques, techniques of making rational and creative decisions
and to analyze typical mistakes made by managers in terms of knowledge, ignorance and sometimes sensibility.
Let's start with the first topic.
Let's talk about the procedures that accompany the decision based on the research.
In the slide, you see the definition of a management decision.
This is a directive act of purposeful influence on the management object, and so on.
It is emphasized that the decision must be made based on the analysis of reliable data.
Each word here has its own weight.
Analysis is possible, but analysis is needed only when you are sure of the data you have received.
And you can get reliable data only by conducting certain research.
And, of course, the definition of the purpose of the action, as well as the composition of the plan or the program of achieving this goal, plays an important role and importance in a management decision.
We will not talk for a long time about the classification of management decisions.
We have already talked about this a little earlier.
Let me just remind you that, in time, decisions can be strategic, tactical or operational.
The degree of participation of specialists in them can be individual, collective or collegial decisions.
In terms of the maintenance of the management process, social, economic, organizational and technical.
We are more interested in the last item on this list.
In terms of the nature of decision-making, there are intuitive and rational decisions.
And a somewhat intermediate position between them is taken by decisions that are made on the basis of judgment.
We will talk about this.
Intuitive decisions are not really the subject of our discussion.
But to emphasize the role and importance of rational decisions, let's talk a little about intuitive ones.
Since the manager is constantly busy, busy, communicating with a large number of people, he often has to make decisions quickly, and he has no time to think.
In such cases, he relies on his intuition.
In principle, there is no big sin in this, because intuitive decisions are very often the only right thing to do.
And yet, it should be noted that intuitive decisions have both positive and negative sides.
When is it most correct to make intuitive decisions, that is, positive sides of this moment?
First of all, intuitive decisions are most often based on when rational techniques are not suitable by several criteria.
But it also happens that all the techniques seem to work, and the result is achieved with mathematical accuracy, and the manager feels something is wrong.
The feeling tells you that you need to choose another alternative.
Sometimes you need to listen to yourself.
The second positive aspect of intuitive decisions is that you don't need a lot of time or resources to make such decisions.
And you can make a decision very quickly.
But intuitive decisions have weaknesses that limit their value.
The first one is that when we make an intuitive decision, we cannot tell anyone, including ourselves, what criteria we used to make this decision.
This is where the following problems arise.
It will be very difficult for us to explain to other people why we made this decision.
Moreover, if we suddenly need to analyze this decision, no matter if it is a success or failure, we will not be able to repeat this experience.
We will not be able to make a justification for why we need to act this way or that way in the next situation.
Another important aspect of the fact that intuitive decisions are not always acceptable is that very often, when making an intuitive decision and often encountering failures, the manager can become very vulnerable to manipulation.
Nevertheless, we cannot refuse to make intuitive decisions.
The subjective moment in making a decision is always present, but the manager's task is to make a management decision, and leave the subjective moment, his preference, as it were, in the background.
If we now move on to rational decisions, it is important to note that a rational decision is called rational because it must be scientifically justified.
That is, it must be based on the knowledge of objective laws, regardless of the field, management of staff, finances, and so on.
It must be based on the results of research, and the manager must have a good scientific foresight of how the events will develop after the decision is made.
As I said, the middle ground between intuitive and rational decisions is based on judgment.
What is the difference? In essence, the manager makes a judgment when he has previous experience of making decisions in similar situations that have happened in the past.
This is the subconsciously acquired information that allows him to act as an expert in making a management decision.
There are only two buts that limit the use of decisions based on judgment.
The first is that all situations in business are unique and cannot be repeated with precision until the third sign after the comma.
Situations change, people change, external and internal circumstances change, so the previous decision cannot be completely transferred to the current situation.
It must be adapted to the current situation.
The second limiting point is that in a practical situation, when there are many factors influencing a decision,
it is very difficult for a person without any knowledge of computer programs, analysis programs, and so on, and sometimes it is almost impossible to take all these factors into account, especially in their mutual influence on each other.
And now it's time to say, what is the purpose of a decision?
As a rule, a decision is made with a certain goal or several goals, which is also very common.
What is a goal?
By definition, it is the ideal representation of the desired result.
From this definition, it follows that the first and main task of a manager in preparing for making a management decision is to realize the goal that he wants to achieve in the ideal case.
And the goal of any decision is to get rid of uncertainty in the future.
If we talk about goals, there are a lot of goals written in the literature, we will only talk about those features that are interesting for the purposes of our video course.
First of all, it should be noted that goals can be multiple, including mutually excluding.
What do multiple goals mean?
Let's say you decided to have a corporate holiday. What is the purpose of a corporate holiday now?
It can be to please employees, it can be an incentive for the management team, it can be a PR campaign if you invite people who are influential or who depend on the well-being of your company.
You can list them for a very long time.
The next feature of goals can be defined as hidden goals.
This is a very serious and very problematic area in the manager's goals.
What is a hidden goal?
A goal that is not announced in the public, but is kept inside a person.
Goals can be hidden for very different reasons.
For example, a person pursues his personal goals, but cannot express them publicly.
For example, a meeting is scheduled at the end of the working day.
A person says, no, it is completely pointless to hold a meeting at the end of the working day, people are already tired, let's do it the next morning.
On the one hand, it seems to be a concern for people, for colleagues, on the other hand, it is quite possible that this person has a date today.
There are also reasons for hiding true goals.
Sometimes a true goal is hidden if a person assumes that his goal does not correspond to the official goals, for example, proposed by the management.
And in order not to spoil his relationship, he will keep silent about his hidden goal.
There are times when a decision must be made in a group.
In this case, the presence of hidden goals can make it very, very difficult to make decisions.
If several people have their hidden goals.
Therefore, the task of the manager, when setting goals, is to first of all not only determine, realize his own goal, but also find out what hidden goals other participants of the process may pursue.
Well, the last thing to explain a little is the purpose of preference.
Preference is a very interesting category.
In fact, making a decision in 99 cases is a preference for one or another possible alternative.
Preference is always subjective.
Therefore, we can say that there are no best decisions.
The decision is always the best.
Only for a specific situation, only in specific conditions, only for a specific person making the decision.
We have already said that the decision must be made on the basis of certain studies.
And the study is carried out in order to get information that the manager lacks to make a reasonable decision.
Information is the data that reduces the uncertainty in the knowledge of the manager, of any subject making a decision about the object of management or decision.
Information is divided into subconscious, subject and formal statistical data.
Subconscious information is the information that a person has accumulated as a result of previous experience, study of the current situation, and so on.
Subconscious information is the information about the subject obtained on the basis of the studies, the setting of the experiment, and so on.
And the formal statistical data is what allows you to get a certain kind of mathematical apparatus.
All information contributes to the movement from uncertainty to certainty.
In order to formulate the situation, in order to analyze the processes and situations reliably, in order to prepare a reasonable management decision.
In terms of awareness of the manager in relation to different types of information,
three possible situations are classified in practical and theoretical sources, depending on the information potential of the manager making the decision.
On the one hand, this can be setting goals in conditions of complete certainty of the external and internal environment.
What does complete certainty mean?
This means that the manager probably knows what result will be the result of his decision.
But there are very few such situations in business.
Of course, it is possible to evaluate qualitatively that if we do this, we will succeed, if we do otherwise, it will lead to failure.
Such situations in real life practically do not happen.
Even if there is certainty, there is still a possibility that it will be either better or worse.
Therefore, even in the conditions of certainty, the manager must justify his decision.
Most often, the setting of goals is carried out in conditions of either complete or incomplete certainty.
That is, when the manager does not know what events will occur, what factors will affect the development of the situation, how they will affect the result of the decision.
And in fact, the success of the manager in professional activity will depend on the intensity of the manifestation of certain outcomes or results of the decision.
Now let's move on to topic 2.
Let's talk about making decisions in the condition of uncertainty, which happens most often in practical life situations in professional manager activity.
Under uncertainty, in this case, the incompleteness or inaccuracy of information about the conditions of achieving the planned result is understood.
In addition, uncertainty can be formed by the presence of factors of chance and contradiction.
The adoption of managerial decisions in the conditions of uncertainty has its own specifics.
In fact, the choice of each option of decision means that several actions can be taken, and the consequence of these actions will not be one, but many outcomes.
And the probability of their occurrence is absolutely unknown or does not make sense.
It should also be noted that when making decisions in the conditions of uncertainty, each fixed alternative corresponds not to one completely certain, but to many results.
Therefore, the choice of the only one, the best alternative for a particular situation or for a particular person is significantly difficult.
Uncertainty in different managerial situations is always determined by three factors.
The first factor is the lack of complete information, which can be supplemented under certain conditions, as well as by chance or contradiction, which can sometimes be foreseen, and sometimes it is absolutely impossible.
What is chance? Chance is what happens in the initial conditions is not the same, and therefore it is absolutely impossible to say with certainty what will happen this time.
Every year we have winter. This is a standard phenomenon, but it is impossible to say that an abundant snowfall will happen on the day when you planned to transport a particularly valuable cargo.
In the world of chance, a special mathematical apparatus has been developed for working in the world of chance, and probability theories are studied about the pattern.
Without going deep into this issue, let's just say that the probability of any event fluctuates from 0 to 1. If the probability is 0, then the event cannot occur. If the probability of an event is estimated as 1, then such a phenomenon is classified as reliable.
Probability estimates allow us to give a qualitative and quantitative, which is especially important, characteristic of future events, random events.
We also noted such a factor as a contradiction. Any action has a contradiction.
Whatever the manager does, there will always be something that will resist or contradict him.
A very large number of phenomena can be classified as such. These may be natural disasters, violations of contractual obligations, accidents, banal thefts.
These may be the resistance of people who consider your decision to be wrong and take certain actions to oppose the implementation of this decision.
The manager must, if in the case of an accident, excuse this tautology, very often there are situations when the manager cannot predict with a sufficient degree of confidence about the possibility, probability of the occurrence,
then in the event of a contradiction, the direct task of the manager is to study possible places, situations where the implementation of the decision will be opposed.
This can help him, including the correctly set goals of a specific study on the study of situations where and how this contradiction can manifest itself.
As I said, if the manager does not have enough information to make a decision, then the only recommendation is that you need to spend time and certain resources to get additional information.
In order to reduce the level of uncertainty, otherwise you will have to act on a guess, relying on experience and intuition. We do not diminish the importance of intuition, but we say that a rational decision should be justified.
Since the decision is made in the condition of uncertainty, the concept of risk is associated with it. There is always a possibility to lose something, to part with something that flows out of the specifics of the activity of human society.
And when making a decision, the manager must assess the risks.
In other words, for the manager, there is an indivisible degree of risk, first of all, the obtain of adverse results for him due to the uncertainty of the situation.
The risk can be very high.
In the case when the manager makes a justified decision in the condition of risk, it is very important for him to reduce the number of basic components that are involved in the decision.
The number of components, the criteria that are involved in determining the outcome, that is, to simplify the situation. Then it will be easier to assess the degree of susceptibility to possible losses or to assess the possibility of obtaining certain benefits.
We have already said the word alternative more than once, that is, an option of possible solutions.
The least risky alternative is the one that is more confident in the judgments of the outcome, where it is possible to more accurately assess the degree of risk.
The most acceptable or the least risky alternative is the one that gives the most benefit in the event of an offensive.
Accordingly, the least losses and the least possibility of being subject to an adverse outcome.
This is the goal of the decision-making theory.
This is not an easy task. In fact, the formation of efficiency criteria is one of the most complex problems in the theory and practice of management.
It is connected with the transformation of goals and the ideal vision of the person making the decision in measurable quantities.
That is, we emphasize once again that the criteria are set by the person making the decision, based on their preferences.
I highlight two areas of practical application of the criteria.
In the first case, they are used to assess the actual events. And the second is used in the process of making decisions to assess future outcomes.
In both cases, the essential characteristics remain the same. That is, the purpose of the efficiency criteria is to measure the properties and relations in the system.
The second general point is the orientation to the final goal and task of the organization, including its mission.
If we talk about the criteria for assessing the future, then here it is necessary to note two points.
The first is that as we move into the future, the uncertainty of the situation increases and the information potential decreases.
That is, we can only estimate the probability of the onset of one or another event.
And the second point is that as the predicted period increases, that is, we predict for a year, two or twenty years, the number of various alternatives increases many times.
This is objective. There is no point in fighting this, but you need to be ready for this and form the efficiency criteria accordingly.
There are four basic principles for forming the efficiency criteria.
The first one says that in the conditions of a systemic crisis in the economy, the corresponding system of criteria and restrictions is required to solve the problems that have arisen.
The second principle is that the formation of a system of criteria and restrictions must correspond to the principle of consistent reduction of uncertainty.
The third principle says that the formation of efficiency criteria, as we have already said above, must be necessarily associated with and conditioned by the mission of the organization and its ultimate goals.
And the last principle, the fourth principle, says that the system of efficiency criteria must be organically integrated into the human-machine system.
Of course, the human component in these systems is decisive, but for complex, multi-plan solutions, oriented towards the long-term perspective, it is not possible to make a decision without taking part in the process.
This is the main advantage of modern information technology.
In addition to the principles, there are certain conditions for forming the efficiency criteria.
The first condition is that the efficiency criteria must be quantitative, that is, expressed in numbers and have a real physical meaning.
That is, there should not be any abstraction, each in its own way understandable.
The second condition for the efficiency criteria says that the criteria must be determined with sufficient accuracy, without large costs and time loss.
In addition, the efficiency criteria must meet the requirements of completeness, that is, reflect the significant aspects of the object or phenomenon studied.
An important condition for the criteria is that the criteria must be assigned an accurate action algorithm when solving any problem from a variety of data.
What does an accurate action algorithm mean?
In fact, we set a certain kind of limitation.
We say, if we get some kind of profitability value in 5 years, then we can make this decision.
In this case, the profitability of the enterprise will act as a criteria for efficiency.
Otherwise, if the criteria do not meet the critical value, then the algorithm should be different.
That is, we must either refuse this alternative or change the task.
And the last one. Each selected criteria for efficiency must clearly reflect the usefulness of a separate alternative.
We will talk a little later about how the criteria for usefulness are considered.
Here is an example of what criteria can be applied in this particular simple tactical solution.
Although, no, probably not tactical. It can be evaluated not as a tactical solution.
The task is to find a place for the public reception room.
In this case, the minimum area of the room, maximum costs for this room, and the location of this room is considered an important criterion for the owner of this problem.
Including in this concept of location and access roads and parking, possibly guarded parking, and so on.
Since we said that the criteria must be expressed quantitatively and clearly interpret a certain order of actions,
then in this case, all these three listed criteria are required to be assigned digital values.
That is, what should be the minimum area, what should be the maximum costs, and so on.
That is, only by fulfilling all the conditions that we have listed above, we can make our own one or another alternative solution.
But if we look at these criteria from a different point of view, it is quite possible that some of them will have more value when making a decision, and some of them will have less value.
That is, we are talking about the fact that it is important not only to determine the absolute size of the criterion, but also to give it weight, as they say, to calculate the coefficient of weight, or to give it certain points, fixing the importance of the criterion.
You can fix the importance of a particular criterion in the form of points.
And for clarity, you can make such a simple matrix table.
Without even sticking to the above example, but in the general scheme, we have three alternatives and three criteria.
We assign them point values, and then everything is very simple.
In this case, alternative number two gets more points and, accordingly, is recognized as the best from a mathematical point of view.
However, it should be noted that this does not mean that this particular alternative should be chosen as the best, because mathematics and life sometimes diverge in making decisions.
Here, when making a decision, it can play a role in the preferences of the person making the decision and his intuitive feeling that, yes, alternative number two is good in all respects, but it is uncomfortable for me in this room.
And I will not recommend it to the public reception organization.
There are several ways to form criteria. Two of them are associated with a rather complex mathematical apparatus.
And we will not consider them within the framework of this video course. We will focus only on the efficiency coefficient, which is calculated quite simply.
In fact, you need to calculate how much resources will be spent in order to get the planned result.
This criterion is most often used in conjunction with a whole system of restrictions that allow to ensure the reliability and reality of this indicator.
When applying this method of creating efficiency criteria, the principle of comparison is implemented, in fact, the agreement of costs with results.
That is, the efficiency of converting costs into results is assessed. The main drawback of this method of measuring efficiency is that the indicators of the numerator and denominator can be arbitrarily varied.
And if the values of the numerator and denominator are chosen incorrectly or inadequately, this can lead to a distorted value of the efficiency coefficient.
So, if you put a small number in the numerator, it can significantly affect the assessment of efficiency.
That is, we are talking about the fact that if you plan to get a small result, but you think that you have spent a lot on it, then the efficiency coefficient will be greatly reduced.
It can be said that a lot of good decisions is a combination of incomparable decisions, each of which is impossible to improve.
Thus, this is a certain stage of making a management decision. The manager is given several options, each of which is good in its own way.
And the next stage will be the informalization of the decision, that is, giving preference to one or another option.
Thus, if there is no information about the probability values of the state of the environment, in fact, the theory does not give unambiguous, mathematically strict recommendations on the choice of criteria.
As we have already said, the manager has several options, and he must, based on his intuition, his judgment, his preferences, choose one or the other.
He still has the opportunity to get additional information by conducting research, but it still remains more or less subjective.
This can cause a complaint that the theory is weak. But the point is not in the theory, but in the fact that the situation cannot become definite to the end.
Then one wonders why so many words, so many theories, definitions, and so on, for the description of the process of preparation for making a decision. What is the point?
And to some extent they protect the person who makes them from manipulation, insure them in the event of future decisions, and so on.
That is, of course, all this is extremely important, necessary and useful.
The management decision-making process offers several methods of removing uncertainty from the future situation. One of these methods is the method of predictive scenarios.
This method includes certain methods, step by step.
In this tutorial, all steps are prescribed.
The predictive scenario of the situation development is built in the event of making a decision.
It should be emphasized, as I said, that the effective implementation of this method is possible only when special information systems are used.
This is especially true for the last two or three steps, which cannot be done without special information systems.
What else should be noted? The method of predictive scenarios is closely related to the analysis method.
Analysis cannot exist without it.
This is one of the tasks of the analysis method.
The second task is to assess the potential threats and weaknesses of the organization in the future.
And how this will affect its predictable state.
This is also one of the significant sections of the analysis method.
The third task is to assess the management decisions and how they will affect the trajectory of the organization's development.
What is the area of permissible alternatives and the implemented solutions and their consequences.
The scenario is a hypothetical, imaginary picture of the subsequent development of the situation, space and time.
All those events that make up the overall evolution of the organization in the interest of the researcher.
The scenario must contain and be clearly described the causal links that determine the possible dynamics of the system's state changes and the impact of which these changes will occur.
The scenario can be formally described as follows.
The abbreviation for this model is the past situation, the initial situation and the future situation.
The real past and the initial situation are marked with solid lines, and the punctirum is a subjective representation of the person about the situation.
In fact, the area outside the intersection is the degree of uncertainty.
The right part of the picture is sometimes called a tube, a scenario tube.
In different conditions, this tube can be wider or narrower, depending on the goals and tasks that are pursued and how far the horizon is from the initial situation.
The properties of the scenario allow to significantly narrow the initial uncertainty, including by introducing indicators of the state,
and allow to build a tube of permissible trajectories of the development of the research systems that can be used in the process of preparation, adoption and implementation of the management solution.
An indicator is a parameter of the system that is critical to the state of the limit.
As indicators, the parameters that can be expressed in numbers are chosen.
And the limit values of these indicators are set.
Why are they called indicators?
Because when the indicator goes beyond a certain limit, it will mean the system is unstable or its transition to a different state or even the death of the system.
As an indicator, a certain share of the revenue, for example, can be a part of the revenue of the public reception room.
As a criterion, the size of the rental fee can be an indicator.
We will not go through the step-by-step methodology.
It is described in detail in the textbook.
There are also quite complex drawings, which are difficult to reproduce on slides.
Therefore, I suggest you get acquainted with it yourself.
Rational decision-making
And we are moving on to the third topic of the technique of making rational decisions.
Within the framework of one video course, it is difficult to disassemble all the techniques.
We will focus on three of them.
This is the method of equal exchange, the tree of decisions and the cause-and-effect analysis.
Those who have made decisions in their life know well that tasks with a single goal are extremely rare.
Usually, there are several goals.
And in order to make a decision on several goals, the most rational and, at the same time, the most difficult option for solving the problem is to establish a compromise.
And the more compromises you have to look for, the more difficult the situation, the more options there are for solving this problem.
And the more goals the person making the decision pursues, the more preferences he has.
Peter Drucker, a well-known guru in the field of management, believes that the best solution lies between necessary and erroneous compromises.
A good leader is experienced enough to understand the difference between them.
The method that is offered for your consideration and which allows you to find a compromise solution to complex tasks with several options of choice was proposed by John Hammond with the authors.
And it was called the method of equal exchange, which is essentially a barter deal.
To exchange one option for another.
We cannot claim that the application of the method of equal exchange will help you make a difficult solution simple.
There will still be a difficult choice between what is desirable to achieve and what will have to be sacrificed.
But the main advantage of the method of equal exchange is that it makes you use a rational, weighted approach to evaluating each compromise.
And, in fact, it allows you to make the right decision.
The method of equal exchange is quite difficult to reproduce in a video course.
It is better to work it out with a pencil in hand and in front of a sheet of paper.
The manual says that you need to first develop several alternative solutions to the problem, to draw up a so-called table of consequences.
For example, this is all well disassembled.
And then, by the method of exception, reduce the number of possible alternative solutions and already between the remaining ones, find a compromise solution.
The next method, which is widely used in the theory of decision-making, is the tree of solutions.
The main principle of its construction is the following three points.
First, you need to formulate a problem.
This problem is written in the very top corner of the sheet.
And from this starting point, so-called point, two or more branches go further.
Usually, there are two branches, because most often at the first stage we answer the question of whether to do it or not.
To take or not to take, to give or not to give, for example, a loan, and so on.
And, in fact, these branches denote possible solutions to the problem.
What direction will these branches take?
In fact, it does not play a big role.
There are options when the branches go down from the top point.
There are solutions when the branches go to the right from the starting point.
In fact, it does not change.
But at subsequent levels there are subordinate elements.
There are three of them.
These are the solution, the event or state, and the consequences.
Each of them is denoted by a conditional sign.
For solutions, this is a circle, for events and states, a square, and for consequences, a triangle.
From these initial solutions, the following solutions, states or consequences can be branched off.
And thus a branched tree is built.
And so it continues until the level when the person making the decision, in general,
branched off to the last level of consequences or preliminary results.
The following is important when building a branched tree.
The following is important.
At each level, there should be only elements of one type.
Elements of only one type.
That is, either only a solution, or only a state, or only consequences.
The most common practice of making a decision, building a branched tree,
is a three-layer model.
The first layer with possible solutions follows the initial question,
one of which can be chosen.
Then the second layer of events is introduced, which can occur after this decision has been made.
And the third layer already contains consequences in each relevant case.
A branched tree allows to clearly imagine possible solutions along with their consequences
and to get an idea of the probability of certain consequences.
An example of a graphical image of a branched tree
for the task of vaccinating against the flu or not is shown on the slide.
It is also given in a textbook and has been analyzed in detail.
What should be added to this?
The internal nodes of the tree, such as the presence of temperature, infection,
are called the attributes of the database.
These attributes are called predictors or attributes of the split.
In this place, or in the branching point,
there is a split into possible alternative directions of action.
Such a graphical image of the solutions, states and consequences
helps to make the right decision.
To analyze the consequences, it is necessary to introduce something like a common denominator,
namely, the criteria for assessment.
These criteria can be both objective and subjective,
that is, a certain kind of judgment and preference of the person making the decision.
If, as we said, the goal of making the decision is not one,
then in this case, the tree of solutions should be built on several models.
We have received a number of alternatives for making decisions.
It is advisable to build them in a certain hierarchical order, that is, according to priorities.
Perhaps, they can be given a negative rating, starting from 0, which is extremely undesirable,
to 10, which is considered excellent, absolutely acceptable.
Thus, again, between a number of alternatives, you can choose the most favorable one.
The construction of the tree of solutions is not as simple as it may seem at first glance.
The fact is that, as you can see from the diagram,
the probability of the onset of certain consequences is calculated.
But as for determining the probability of the onset of these consequences,
the task is not always easy, and sometimes it is impossible to fulfill.
Therefore, in practice, when building a tree of solutions,
two methods are used.
If it is possible to obtain statistical data and calculate the probability of certain consequences,
then the task is simplified and the solution is more reasonable.
If this is not possible, then the probability values can be given in the assumed order,
which, as you understand, significantly reduces the objectivity of the decision.
What is the meaning and value of the tree of solutions?
First of all, it is that the model clearly shows
what consequences certain solutions may have,
and certain events, and thus help the person making the decision
to structure his thoughts, see the general picture of the development of the problem,
and the consequences of making a decision.
The next method is the cause-and-effect analysis.
We talked a little about it when we were considering the course of the method of making management decisions.
But then we were interested in how the method allows us to analyze
the cause-and-effect connections between the data and the events during the study.
When preparing a management decision,
the cause-and-effect analysis plays an extremely important role and importance.
Its main goal is to identify the cause-and-effect connections between the conditions and events,
to see what is due to what,
and, based on this analysis, to determine the dependence of some variables on others.
Since there are no simple events in the world,
let's say, two-level events,
and, as a rule, this forms a whole chain of causes and effects,
the cause-and-effect analysis aims to determine the hierarchy of these causes and effects,
which starts from the point of the current state, the initial state,
and leads back to the point where the problem needs to be diagnosed in order to be solved.
An example of the cause-and-effect chain is shown on the slide.
The problem that the manager faced is that a valuable employee is fired from the marketing department.
The scheme allows us to trace what was the primary reason for the firing of a valuable employee.
If we look closely at this scheme, we will see that there are many problems in this organization,
and the primary reason for the situation was the absence of a planning system in the marketing department.
Then, the problem of a snow coma actually arose,
but the importance and value of such a scheme is to solve not only this minute problem,
but also to determine the causes of this problem in order to correct the situation.
When conducting an analysis, it is very important to follow a certain sequence.
And as I have repeatedly said, repeating the theorists in the field of decision-making,
the most important thing is a correctly, clearly formulated problem.
Then, there is a mandatory identification of the cause or several causes of the problem,
an explanation of the circumstances that caused the problem, and then a check of the significance,
that is, whether the connection of two variables is statistically significant or not.
When we talk about statistics, about the assessment of probability states,
it is necessary to mention the so-called mistakes of the first and second order,
which are important not only for the cause of the investigative analysis when solving problems,
but also in a number of other life situations.
The mistake of the first order is that the conclusion is made about the truth of some statement,
when this statement is not true.
For example, if we talk about the cause of the investigative analysis,
then you can mistakenly conclude that two variables are connected to each other,
while in fact there is no connection between them.
The mistake of the second order is that you consider some statement to be untrue,
while it is actually true.
That is, if we talk about the cause of the investigative analysis,
then we conclude in the case of the second order of the mistake
that two variables are not connected, but they are actually connected to each other.
Usually, the mistake of the first order is considered more serious,
trying to reduce the probability of its conclusion.
And minimizing the possibility of the occurrence of a mistake of the first order is much more important
than reducing the probability of the second order.
Maybe it doesn't look very clear. Let's try to illustrate this with examples.
The division of error solutions into mistakes of the first and second order
is also caused by the fact that the consequences of different types of error solutions
are fundamentally different in that the lost win
has less impact on the situation than the won win.
For example, for a stockbroker, the consequences of not buying the stock
when it should have been bought are different from the consequences of buying the stock,
but it should not have been bought.
This is the first mistake of the first order.
The first situation in this case will mean that the lost profit could have been earned, but it did not.
And the second situation, when the shares were bought, but it was not necessary to do this,
is direct losses up to the broker's bankruptcy.
And one more example.
For a general, starting a military operation that will be lost is much worse
than missing a situation when a successful operation could have been carried out.
The last example can be actually completely transferred to the practice of real business.
Yes?
What else should be noted?
And this is important.
When conducting a cause-and-effect analysis, it is always necessary to work methodically
and study all the collected information very carefully.
And based on the collected data, make a mental conclusion.
Could the assumed cause actually lead to the observed effect?
With all the apparent consistency of the cause and effect,
in practice, this is not always obvious.
We cannot say what is the primary reason, a bad working environment in the team
or poor performance indicators of the work.
You need to study every specific case.
And one more point.
It is necessary to keep in mind that if elimination,
this is like a criterion,
if the elimination of one assumed cause does not lead to the disappearance of the observed effect,
then this clearly indicates that the primary cause has not been identified.
In this case, the question arises, what to do?
Well, there are several possible methods of conduct.
On the one hand, you can try to check this, this and this by the method of elimination.
In practice, most often there is not enough time or other resources
to check all the causes and primaries.
Here you can, again, refer to the Pareto principle
and see, identify the main root causes,
and leave the secondary causes for further analysis.
If we talk about the features of the cause of the investigative analysis,
then it is necessary to focus on the following points.
The cause and the consequence, the primary cause, we have already talked about them.
The depth of the chain of causes and consequences,
and also the multiple causes of one consequence,
or vice versa, the multiple consequences of one cause.
Both options are possible.
We have partially already talked about the cause and the consequence.
It should be added that the cause and the consequence can be conditioned on each other.
And the task of the person who conducts the analysis is to see
what this mutual influence is and what affects what.
The primary cause is the starting point that provoked the emergence of the problem of the snowball coma.
Or the cause chain.
And the third aspect is necessary to talk about.
The depth of the cause and consequence chain, in principle, can be very large.
But it is not always reasonable to do this.
The task of the person who conducts the cause-and-consequence analysis
is to have an accurate understanding of where to stop.
That is, you don't need to dig until, I don't know, some archaic times,
but it is quite enough to stop, let's say, at the third or fifth level.
Everything else will be without almost unproductive waste of time and resources.
As for the multiple causes of one consequence,
this is a very common phenomenon in organizations.
Yes, and in private life too.
Probably, everyone is familiar with the fact that suddenly events are formed in such a way
that one thing happens, another thing happens, a third thing happens,
and their complexity causes the emergence of one or another problem.
But in reverse order, a number of consequences can arise from one cause.
If we take as an example what you have described in the textbook,
then, for example, the presence of an ethnic group can cause a number of problems
for the leadership of this organization or company.
In order to make a decision, you need to develop certain criteria.
We talked about efficiency criteria.
Let's look at the term criteria in a slightly different way.
According to the term criteria, in the theory of decision-making,
criteria denote a significant, understandable person making a decision,
the characteristics, results of the operation.
And there are many alternatives in the field of criteria definition.
For different alternatives, which is very important,
a person's criteria can take on different meanings,
which reflect the consciousness of the person who makes a decision
and express the degree of his preference for certain alternatives.
In theory, there is a rule for decision-making.
If one alternative is more preferable than the other,
then this more preferable alternative should have a more preferable rating.
That is, if we choose an alternative with a better rating,
then it is believed that we choose the best alternative.
As one of the criteria, when making a decision,
the so-called rating of usefulness is applied,
which refers to direct methods.
It is based on the assumption that the attitude of the person making the decision
can be represented by the function of usefulness.
And it can be expressed by the formula that is presented on the slide.
It is read as follows.
Alternative A is no less preferable than alternative B.
Therefore, the function of usefulness should be no less important than that of alternative B.
Thus, it is only necessary to find an alternative that is most useful,
and it will be the best for making a decision.
From the perspective of mathematics,
there can be several best alternatives with the highest ratings of usefulness,
since the maximum of the function of usefulness can be achieved
by several elements of a multitude of definitions.
In this case, we repeat once again,
interpretations will help the manager to choose the best solution from the best with the help of preferences.
When making a decision based on the criteria,
the so-called Okama principle is very often used,
or the razor blade.
This principle states that a razor blade does not multiply an entity without necessity.
And if we translate this into a simple language,
it essentially means that if the same phenomenon can be explained by several different circumstances,
and one of the circumstances is much simpler than the others,
then the preference should be given to a simpler explanation.
To make it clear what the coefficient of the assessment of usefulness is,
let's take an example from the work of the marketing department.
The criteria for the usefulness of marketing information are assessed as a ratio of the amount of useful,
that is, the information they need, to the total amount of information coming from the source.
For example, if a fax comes to the marketing department with a currency exchange rate of 10 foreign currencies,
and the department uses only one position,
then the usefulness of the incoming information in this case will be equal to 1 tenth.
And then the criteria for usefulness are established, that is, its critical value.
In this case, we can consider this source of information as useful,
because the lower value of the criteria is set as 5 hundredths.
Another example.
We all know that our computers are constantly subjected to the destructive effect of various viruses,
and have long been accustomed to installing various antivirus programs.
To this day, we understand that an antivirus program should be able to recognize and protect our computer from all known viruses.
The function of the usefulness of a computer program in this case is determined by the ratio of the number of viruses caught to all existing ones.
However, the development of science and technology, including information technology,
suggests that such an expression of the criteria for usefulness and safety no longer corresponds to reality.
At present, it is already proposed to assess the usefulness of an antivirus program
by the ability of the antivirus program to detect unknown viruses.
That is, it must recognize what is not embedded in the database.
As we can see, the criteria are changing.
It should be noted that when choosing a criteria, there are a number of restrictions that vary and depend on both the situation and the specific leaders.
They are listed on your slide.
This is the inadequacy of resources, that is, the lack of the necessary resources.
These are personnel restrictions, financial restrictions.
I think this is understandable and does not require special comment.
The restrictions of scientific and technical progress.
That is, science, so to speak, does not yet offer solutions in this matter.
These are market restrictions, including the actions of competitors.
These are legal and moral ethical restrictions, which very often do not allow to make one or another decision.
And the restriction of authority when choosing a criterion.
That is, not everyone who makes a decision has all the authority.
In addition to these listed restrictions, there are also criteria that are called killers.
This is a term that has developed.
And killers are called those criteria that must be taken into account, otherwise the decision will simply not make sense.
This can be explained by an elementary example.
If a person has no driving license, he cannot look for a job as a private driver, so to speak, or just a driver.
If a person, so to speak, has an allergy to flowers, then he will not go to rest where the grass is just blooming now, and so on.
And the second point by which the criterion can be called a killer is all those circumstances that a decision-maker would like to avoid.
Here we again face a subjective point, but this is a very important concept.
It can be illustrated by the example.
If a person is an introvert, it is difficult for him to work in communication with people, then he will probably not look for a job in the service sector, a job with clients,
and most likely he will find a job in the production sector or in the back office.
Well, the time has come to choose an alternative.
How is it done?
First of all, all possible options for solving the problem must be identified.
Then you need to limit the number of options for comparison with several alternatives using the above criteria, preferences, judgments, compromises, and so on.
Next, it is necessary to evaluate all the effective alternatives and compare them with each other for the next choice of the best of them.
In this case, the assessment assumes the determination of both a positive and a negative effect of introducing an alternative solution.
Well, the final point is to choose an alternative.
To choose the right alternative, it is necessary, as a rule, to take into account the previous experience, although, as we noted, you can not always rely entirely and completely on the past experience.
The second is to conduct an experiment.
And the third is to conduct a study and analysis.
The past experience becomes a useful tool in making decisions if it is a thorough analysis, and not a blind follow-up to what has already been done.
That is, a blind copy of what has already been done once.
Conducting an experiment.
Perhaps, for some alternatives, conducting an experiment is difficult or impossible.
But if there is such an opportunity, then the experiment must be conducted.
What is meant by the word experiment?
This is an experiment to test alternatives in artificially created conditions.
Let's suppose that the developers of the passive safety systems of the car offer an alternative option of a safety pillow.
Artificial conditions can be created to test how the pillow will behave in certain artificially created extreme conditions, how it will contribute to the safety of the passenger, and so on.
As for the study and analysis, the solution of the problem should be considered based on the search for the connections between its alternatives and the restrictions that are considered regarding the set goals.
It is also useful to decompose the problem into separate components.
This is the essence of the analysis.
To study each of these elements separately, so that after making a synthesis, you can come to a justified solution.
Thank you.